This is the ultimate OpenClaw cost
optimization guide. If you're setting up
OpenClaw incorrectly, you might be
burning through hundreds of dollars of
API credits, and I was running into the
same issue. However, I did some in-depth
research on how to cut your OpenClaw API
bill costs by 70 to 97%. Check this out.
I was able to lower it to less than 30
cents a day. And I'm using different
models for different use cases and I'm
currently running on less than 10 cents
a day and I only spent $2 this month so
far while I have AI agents running all
of these processes for me. My agent team
is really large. So bringing the cost
down on a day-to-day [music] basis is
super important. You might consider
running Mac Mini on your own local
machine, but you need to be super
careful because this can be dangerous
and have serious security implications.
Because of this, I'm running it on a VPS
called Hostinger that allows me to run
this entire setup for around $6.29 a
month. I'll not only show you exactly
how to set up OpenClaw on Hostinger with
just a few clicks, but then I'll show
you a few models you can use, how to set
up cost optimization, how to optimize
your memory and your agents, compact
your chats, and keep your entire API
cost very low. Your time is valuable, so
let's get right to it. And before we get
into how to set up the cost
optimization, let me show you why this
matters in the first place. In my open
claw, I currently have an agent fleet
setup of more than 19 agents that
continuously build different things for
[music] me or finish tasks. For example,
I have a content agent, a product agent,
research agent, I have [music] a deaf
agent that continues to build cool
projects for me. All of these projects
were built autonomously by my AI agent
and it did all of that while I sleep. It
has simple apps like a Pomodoro timer. I
have AI prompt managers that help me
come up with better prompts. It even
came up with a thumbnail analyzer for me
and I just have to paste in my image and
it analyzes if it's clickworthy and what
elements I can improve. I have a mission
control setup that shows me exactly how
many tokens I use and how much I spent
this month as well as recent sessions.
And these are just my web agents. I also
have other agents that help me with
different tasks. So, if you want to
learn more how I set [music] up these
agents, let me know down in the comments
and I'll make another video on that. But
now that you see that I have many agents
working for me non-stop. It is super
important to manage my API costs. I
already have multiple VPSs set up. As
you can see here, I have two VPSs
running in parallel. And I'll show you
exactly step by step how you can set up
a VPS on Hostinger with a one-click
deployment. And this is the easiest
method in my experience on how to set up
OpenClaw in the first place. If you
already have OpenClaw installed and you
want to skip ahead to the cost
optimization, go ahead. But let's set
this whole thing up from scratch. I have
this entire OpenClaw playbook where I
cover so much more than what we're
covering in this video. everything from
the first 15 messages [music] that I
send all the way down to the strategic
thinking and decision frameworks and how
to train your agents to be
self-improving. If you want access to
that, check out the link in the
description. But we will mainly focus on
this subsection which is part of the
guide which I'm leaving down below for
free as well so you can follow along. To
get started, click on the link in the
description as well or click on this
link that I have in the free guide
below. [music] This brings you to the
one-click openclaw deployment page and
it's so easy to set up. Watch that.
Simply click on choose plan and I
recommend anyone [music] to use KVM2 or
KVM4 which gives you 16 GB of RAM which
is even enough to run some local models.
Click on choose plan and this normally
costs $29 a month but if you select the
24 or 12 month period you get a good
discount on this as well. And I reached
out to Hostinger and they even give us
an additional 10% off if you use the
coupon code mooler. So with this it's
only $1.69 [music]
a month for the 12-month plan or $8.99 a
month for the 24-month plan. You can
unselect this plan if you want to
because we will be using our own API
keys and choose the server location,
United States. Click on continue. Login
with your Google account and go ahead
and fill out the payment information.
Hit submit payment and it will set up
your open claw for you. And while this
is setting up the VPS, we can already go
ahead and create a new API key for
OpenAI and copy this for later. And you
can do the same for any API provider you
want. But what I'll show you in this
video is how you can set up Open Router
so that you just need to set [music] up
one API key in order to route to any of
the models. To do that, go to open
router.ai. But if you're following along
in the guide below, I also have a
special setup guide here that you can
follow along as well. Sign up to a new
account, click on settings, API keys,
and create a new API key. And I'm going
to give this a credit limit of $10,
which resets every week. Copy this API
key as well. This is needed for later.
Now that we're back at the VPS, you can
set up your open claw with a few
configurations. The first thing that you
see here is your gateway [music] token.
And this is another key that we need to
copy, and we'll get back to that in just
a second. So, copy this somewhere safe.
And this is now where we set up our Open
AI [music] API key. Paste that in right
here. And we're going to skip the other
ones for now because we will set all of
this up with the Open Router key in just
a [music] second. Click deploy. Now that
OpenClaw is configured, let's start it
up and implement our cost savings
techniques. You should see something
like [music] this. Click on open and
paste your gateway token right here.
Click login. And our Open Claw is ready
to get started. And it's prompting us,
hey, I'm online and ready. What do you
want me to do? set up and tackle tasks
or just ask something. And we can
respond in simple English. It's now
asking me for a few things here. And
[music] I'll just answer them really
quickly.
And now that I gave it some information,
it is saving that to memory. [music] If
we want to check what model we're using,
we can simply ask OpenClaw, what model
are you using? And we can see here by
default, it's currently using OpenAI GPT
5.2. But this one is [music] kind of
expensive. As we can see here in the
cost optimization guide, GPT5 runs
around $1.25 to $25 per input tokens and
$10 per output tokens. But there are
other models that we can use that get
similar results. So here's a summary of
the budget tiers. Here's a summary of
the mid tiers. And here's a summary of
the premium tiers. If you're unsure on
what to use, I made a flowchart in this
guide [music] as well. We'll set up the
heartbeat in just a second. We'll either
use Gemini Flash, but then for general
questions and brainstorms, [music] we're
actually going to set up Minimax 2.5
because this is very cheap and really
powerful. For coding tasks and technical
work, you can use a cheap model like
Deepseek V3.2.
>> [music]
>> 2 or GLM5 or for really complex models
use claude opus 4.6 six, but this is
also the most expensive [music] model.
And for other decisions, you can see
here for writing, for example, I choose
clouds on 4.5. And for everything else,
I'm using minimax 2.5. Now, to set this
up, I'm using Open Router. The easiest
way to set this up is to ask Open Router
itself to configure Open Route as the
default model provider. [music] And you
give it the API key. And after that, you
can copy in this long prompt right
[music] here in order to know what kind
of models are available on Open Router.
But this is actually not the most secure
way of doing it because it will save
your open router API key in the config
[music] file. So to make it more secure,
go back to your hostinger dashboard and
simply look for docker manager projects
and click on [music] settings. Click on
projects. Click on manage. And now in
the bottom here we see something called
environment. Once you click on
environment, you can see that you can
import your API keys right here. Simply
click on new environment and add your
open router API key and paste it in
right here from the open router API key
that we set up earlier. Hit save. And we
already have that set up right here. And
this is probably the hardest part of all
of this. Now that our environment
variable is set up, you can go back to
this text that we have right here. And
we can copy this exact prompt. And let's
paste in the prompt [music] right into
this chat window. Hit send. And we can
see now that we have selected the
primary model which is Minax. And we
have fallback options right here. If you
get any error at this point, simply copy
and paste that [music] error into CGPT
and have it help you with the setup.
What might also help is to go over to
your config file right here and click on
raw and you can paste in the exact raw
JSON file into CGPT to help you
troubleshoot it. But in the end, you
should look something like this. You
[music] should have the models with
merge. You should have a base URL with
the open router API. And then you should
see the different models that we set up
here. We see Minimax, we see GLM5,
Gemini 2.5 Flash, and [music] so on and
so forth. And I pasted how this raw file
should look like right here. And if you
want to switch models along the way, for
example, if we want to use sonnet for
creative writing, simply use the command
forward/model and sonnet. [music] And we
can see that it easily switches the
models. So now when we ask what model
are you using, it now shows us that
we're using the claude sonnet model via
the open router API [music] key. And you
can start your creative writing process.
But there is more. Switching to a
cheaper model saves you between 70 and
80% of token usage overall. But now I'll
show you four more simple messages you
can prompt into OpenClaw in order to
save even more on your API costs. The
second thing here is to set up smart
heartbeats. [music] A heartbeat is a
regular interval where Open Claw checks
in with itself and checks if there's
anything that it needs to do. So we can
set the heartbeat interval to 55 minutes
or 60 minutes instead of the default 30
minutes. Or you can set it to shorter if
you want OpenClaw to run non-stop. We'll
use the flashlight model which is the
cheapest available model and we'll set
the heartbeat target to last. Simply
copy this, move this over to openclaw.
I'm going to start a new session [music]
and I paste in the exact prompt here. We
can see that the interval is at 60
minutes. The model is using the
flashlight model and then the target
[music] is last. All right, that was
super easy already. Let's go to the next
one. Now, we're going to limit the
context window and this can save another
80% in overhead reduction. We'll do that
with two simple prompts. First, we'll
ask it to add the session management
rule to my system prompt. And we'll tell
it what it's doing. You operate in
sessions that accumulate text over time,
when to reset, after 15 exchanges or
after 30 minutes of continuous
conversation before switching to a
different task domain or when you notice
that you forgotten early context. The
reset instructions use this command
for/reset. And the best practice is to
output two or three sentence of what it
learned. This preserves some of the
knowledge while clearing the context
[music] weight. If you do want a little
bit more context, you can switch this
maybe to 30 exchanges and 100,000
tokens. But keep in mind, the bigger
this number is, the more context it will
accumulate over [music] time, and each
prom message will take more tokens. So,
we'll copy this message, and we'll paste
it in right here. And we can see here
that it updated its memory and added a
session management cost control part
[music] to this entire chat. And we can
see now that the rules are updated in
the agents.mmpt file. [music] We can
trigger this manually by using
forward/reset. And we can see here that
it implemented these changes. and it's
starting [music] a new session. The
follow-up prompt to this is to copy this
text, which is to configure memory flush
for compaction. I'm asking it to enable
memory flush before compacting uh with a
soft threshold of 4,000 token. You can
change this to higher if you wanted to
have a little bit more context. And this
prevents important context from being
lost while the session is compacted. And
we wanted [music] to confirm that the
changes are applied. Just paste that in.
And it confirmed that it configured
memory flush before compacting is
already enabled. Wonderful. Now to the
next configuration. This one is to
enable prompt caching. This can give us
a 90% discount on repeat content that we
send to the models consistently. So we
copy this, paste it in here, hit enter,
[music] and it actually tells us that
caching is handled automatically by open
router. So we don't have to deal with
that within our open claw. But if you're
using another API key, for example, open
AI or anthropic, then you want to set
this up. And now to the fifth step that
lets you set budgets and guardrails. For
this, you can paste a prompt that says
something along the lines of this, which
gives it a hard limit on how many API
calls it can do. However, sometimes you
might run into problems because you're
working on longer projects or you need
more than the maximum token output per
day. And in this case, I would set this
limit to much higher. But in general, if
you're really concerned on how much
you're spending on your API costs, I
would copy [music] and paste this prompt
here in as well. But just keep in mind
when you're setting this up that you
implemented this because sometimes you
might run into the issue that it
prevents you from doing a certain task
because you're exceeding these [music]
uh constraints that you're setting up.
And that brings us to a few more bonus
tips that you can set up in order for it
to be self-optimizing and in order to
use Open Claw the most efficient way.
One of this is to implement a tool
output efficiency rule which shows that
it should filter for relevance,
summarize large JSON responses and ask
does the user need all of 500 lines or
just the error. [music] Another one is a
self-optimization rule and this is a
continuous cost awareness where [music]
it tracks my behavior and it checks how
many model switches per day, how many
tool calls per question, and when do
[music] you hit compaction. Let's also
paste that in here. Now that you've done
all of this, you can check the
verification checklist to see that
you've implemented all of these
different steps. There are some
instructions for troubleshooting. And if
you're wondering how much this really
saves for my scenario where I'm running
24/7 agents running idle, if you go with
the Opus 4.6 6 defaults or the best
model. [music] This might cost you about
$1,000 per month. But with this new
cheap model plus caching, this can be as
low as a dollar a month if implemented
correctly. If you have any questions
about how to set any of this up, I would
first recommend to use Chat GPT or
Gemini in order to troubleshoot it. And
if if that still doesn't work out, you
can ask some questions down below in the
comments. I'll try to answer all of them
for the first few days of this video
going live. And I also want to hear what
other tips and tricks [music] you might
have that I missed in this video. If you
want to support the channel and you want
to get 10% off, use the link below in
order to get started on your hosting or
VPS and set up OpenClaw in just a few
minutes. And I have another video on the
first 15 prompts after you set up cost
optimization that you can check out
right here. And if you like the video,
like the video. And if you subscribed,
I'll see you in the next